This is an email I sent to the Portland City Council on November 16th, 2025 ahead of a council vote on the proposed purchase of a drone by the Portland Police Department. 

--

Hello Councilors,

I'm writing about the order to approve the Police Department's request to purchase an unmanned arial vehicle/ drone, Order 88-25/26.

I have several concerns with this particular purchase, and many more with the city's use of surveillance technology as a whole. I come to you with direct experience as someone who has organized civic software projects for over a decade and who currently works at an open source software organization that creates and stewards data specifications used by cities. I'm a proponent of open source, democratically controlled technology and I strongly believe that our tax dollars should not be used for tools that put the safety of our residents at risk. This drone — and the suite of services that fall under the Axon umbrella — are all technology that put our residents' safety at risk.

**Residents do not have oversight**. The fact that there is no ordinance, at a city level, regulating how, when, and why the police department can use this kind of technology is alarming. An internal operating procedure is not accountable to any elected official, and I do not think it's sufficient to rely on "intended uses" when much of this tech is only a few years old, and the software associated with it is constantly changing. We barely know what this kind of tech can do, let alone how it will be used. This warrants a broader discussion and policy on the use of AI-enabled tools, specifically tools on our streets paid for by our tax dollars. We haven't had that conversation yet, and we don't have that policy.

**This tech is new — and untested**: It is flatly inaccurate to state that this tech is tested and that it's been in use for a decade. This _specific_ tech is only a [few years old](https://www.aclu.org/documents/eye-in-the-sky-policing-needs-strict-limits "few years old"), and there are zero comprehensive studies backing up the supposed efficiency and safety claims made by the company selling the product. While older drones may have been able to capture video footage of, say, a car crash, the tech being sold by Axon has things like "autonomous navigation" that can support "AI driven autonomy" that 3d maps buildings and anticipates the best route through a city. This tech integrates with other Axon services, creating a pathway for body camera interactions, drone footage, and other evidence to all be integrated into Axon's cloud-based platform. The Axon suite of services is deeply entrenched in the current arms race to train AI models. The State of Maine, let alone Portland, does not have any regulations governing the way this kind of tech and the data it gathers could be used to develop opaque, for-profit datasets that create things like predictive policing models or other supposed innovations that pose grave privacy and security risks to residents, and especially residents of color. 

It therefore is simply inaccurate to rest on any assurances that this tech is well understood; their own sales pitches clearly state that these drones are new, cutting edge technology.

**Federal and state policy is outdated and has gotten worse**.The state policy governing the use of drones for law enforcement was written in 2015. It's concerning to me that in materials, it's been mentioned several times that there's comprehensive regulation governing the use of drones for law enforcement, when the laws governing this predate this specific technology by a decade. The specific kind of tech that we're talking about has implications and direct use cases that are nowhere in state law because they simply didn't exist ten years ago. On the federal level, regulations have recently changed: "Prior to March this year, FAA rules meant that drones could only be used by US security forces if the operator kept the drone in sight. They also couldn’t be used over crowded city streets. An FAA waiver issued that month opened the floodgates, allowing police and security agencies to operate drones beyond a visual line of sight and over large crowds of people." Again, even though the Portland PD says this is not an intended use, there are many ways that the police chief, an un-elected position, can make determinations over how and when the drone is used, including to surveil protests he may deem "violent."

**The Axon contract and relationship needs scrutiny**. I understand, and have witnessed firsthand, that the City's process for purchasing software is cumbersome, outdated, and badly needs an overhaul. In committee meetings related to this drone, I heard referenced several times that the Axon contract for this drone could simply be amended and added on to the existing contract. This contract now contains licensing, software, usage, maintenance, and training for body cameras, the [evidence.com](http://evidence.com) subscription, this drone, and no doubt, the police will soon come forward asking to buy the privacy/transparency nightmare that is [Axon's Draft One AI Transcription](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2025/07/axons-draft-one-designed-defy-transparency "Axon's Draft One  AI Transcription") service in the next year as well. The larger a software contract gets, the more likely it is [to fail](https://www.belfercenter.org/publication/government-tech-projects-fail-default-it-doesnt-have-be-way "to fail") and, importantly, the harder it is for the city to change vendors or to get a competitive bid on a service. Cost can go out the window when there's only one vendor providing the software, only one vendor providing the hardware, only one vendor providing the training and only one vendor providing the replacement and maintenance. For fiscal management, this is a nightmare. Once even more services are looped into that same contract, the city loses even more leverage to change the service, hold the company accountable, or to even control or maintain our own data.

**We need broader, stronger protections for personal safety and security on our streets, now**. I ask that every counselor consider how [Flock](https://www.404media.co/ice-secret-service-navy-all-had-access-to-flocks-nationwide-network-of-cameras/ "Flock"), a company quite similar to Axon, has been sharing its data with ICE and Border Patrol. Flock, like Axon, has [extensive involvement](https://www.axon.com/resources/category/federal "extensive involvement") with ICE already — and that's before the latest budget made ICE the largest law enforcement agency in the history of the world. I think it's imperative that we pass a much broader policy on the local level to end contracts with any company that cannot prove and guarantee that their data will not be shared with the federal government. As it stands, it would be woefully naive to leave our residents safety in the hands of internal operating procedures and a federal rule of law that agencies like ICE are breaking daily. What's to stop Axon from sharing its suite of services with CBP and ICE? I believe that companies like Axon, which are poised to make record profits thanks to the Trump admin, are unlikely to be trusted with our data. I also strongly believe that Portland needs a broader conversation with the public about whether we want surveillance tech in our streets and what rights we demand from the tech our tax dollars pay for. This conversation hasn't happened yet, the policy doesn't exist, and thus I believe approval of this drone purchase is irresponsible and exposes our residents to great harm.

Thank you. I am looking forward to working with you on that broader effort to protect our safety and determine what kind of tech we want on our streets. 

Leo Burnett

--