
>[!abstract]- Public Comment: November 16, 2025
Pre-Vote comment on drone purchase: 
Nov 16, 2025
*This is an email I sent to the Portland City Council on November 16th, 2025 ahead of a council vote on the proposed purchase of a drone by the Portland Police Department.*
> 
> Hello Councilors,
I'm writing about the order to approve the Police Department's request to purchase an unmanned arial vehicle/ drone, Order 88-25/26.
I have several concerns with this particular purchase, and many more with the city's use of surveillance technology as a whole. I come to you with direct experience as someone who has organized civic software projects for over a decade and who currently works at an open source software organization that creates and stewards data specifications used by cities. I'm a proponent of open source, democratically controlled technology and I strongly believe that our tax dollars should not be used for tools that put the safety of our residents at risk. This drone — and the suite of services that fall under the Axon umbrella — are all technology that put our residents' safety at risk.
>
**Residents do not have oversight**. The fact that there is no ordinance, at a city level, regulating how, when, and why the police department can use this kind of technology is alarming. An internal operating procedure is not accountable to any elected official, and I do not think it's sufficient to rely on "intended uses" when much of this tech is only a few years old, and the software associated with it is constantly changing. We barely know what this kind of tech can do, let alone how it will be used. This warrants a broader discussion and policy on the use of AI-enabled tools, specifically tools on our streets paid for by our tax dollars. We haven't had that conversation yet, and we don't have that policy.
>
**This tech is new — and untested**: It is flatly inaccurate to state that this tech is tested and that it's been in use for a decade. This _specific_ tech is only a [few years old](https://www.aclu.org/documents/eye-in-the-sky-policing-needs-strict-limits "few years old"), and there are zero comprehensive studies backing up the supposed efficiency and safety claims made by the company selling the product. While older drones may have been able to capture video footage of, say, a car crash, the tech being sold by Axon has things like "autonomous navigation" that can support "AI driven autonomy" that 3d maps buildings and anticipates the best route through a city. This tech integrates with other Axon services, creating a pathway for body camera interactions, drone footage, and other evidence to all be integrated into Axon's cloud-based platform. The Axon suite of services is deeply entrenched in the current arms race to train AI models. The State of Maine, let alone Portland, does not have any regulations governing the way this kind of tech and the data it gathers could be used to develop opaque, for-profit datasets that create things like predictive policing models or other supposed innovations that pose grave privacy and security risks to residents, and especially residents of color. 
>
It therefore is simply inaccurate to rest on any assurances that this tech is well understood; their own sales pitches clearly state that these drones are new, cutting edge technology.
>
>**Federal and state policy is outdated and has gotten worse**.The state policy governing the use of drones for law enforcement was written in 2015. It's concerning to me that in materials, it's been mentioned several times that there's comprehensive regulation governing the use of drones for law enforcement, when the laws governing this predate this specific technology by a decade. The specific kind of tech that we're talking about has implications and direct use cases that are nowhere in state law because they simply didn't exist ten years ago. On the federal level, regulations have recently changed: "Prior to March this year, FAA rules meant that drones could only be used by US security forces if the operator kept the drone in sight. They also couldn’t be used over crowded city streets. An FAA waiver issued that month opened the floodgates, allowing police and security agencies to operate drones beyond a visual line of sight and over large crowds of people." Again, even though the Portland PD says this is not an intended use, there are many ways that the police chief, an un-elected position, can make determinations over how and when the drone is used, including to surveil protests he may deem "violent."
>
>**The Axon contract and relationship needs scrutiny**. I understand, and have witnessed firsthand, that the City's process for purchasing software is cumbersome, outdated, and badly needs an overhaul. In committee meetings related to this drone, I heard referenced several times that the Axon contract for this drone could simply be amended and added on to the existing contract. This contract now contains licensing, software, usage, maintenance, and training for body cameras, the [evidence.com](http://evidence.com) subscription, this drone, and no doubt, the police will soon come forward asking to buy the privacy/transparency nightmare that is [Axon's Draft One AI Transcription](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2025/07/axons-draft-one-designed-defy-transparency "Axon's Draft One  AI Transcription") service in the next year as well. The larger a software contract gets, the more likely it is [to fail](https://www.belfercenter.org/publication/government-tech-projects-fail-default-it-doesnt-have-be-way "to fail") and, importantly, the harder it is for the city to change vendors or to get a competitive bid on a service. Cost can go out the window when there's only one vendor providing the software, only one vendor providing the hardware, only one vendor providing the training and only one vendor providing the replacement and maintenance. For fiscal management, this is a nightmare. Once even more services are looped into that same contract, the city loses even more leverage to change the service, hold the company accountable, or to even control or maintain our own data.
>
>**We need broader, stronger protections for personal safety and security on our streets, now**. I ask that every counselor consider how [Flock](https://www.404media.co/ice-secret-service-navy-all-had-access-to-flocks-nationwide-network-of-cameras/ "Flock"), a company quite similar to Axon, has been sharing its data with ICE and Border Patrol. Flock, like Axon, has [extensive involvement](https://www.axon.com/resources/category/federal "extensive involvement") with ICE already — and that's before the latest budget made ICE the largest law enforcement agency in the history of the world. I think it's imperative that we pass a much broader policy on the local level to end contracts with any company that cannot prove and guarantee that their data will not be shared with the federal government. As it stands, it would be woefully naive to leave our residents safety in the hands of internal operating procedures and a federal rule of law that agencies like ICE are breaking daily. What's to stop Axon from sharing its suite of services with CBP and ICE? I believe that companies like Axon, which are poised to make record profits thanks to the Trump admin, are unlikely to be trusted with our data. I also strongly believe that Portland needs a broader conversation with the public about whether we want surveillance tech in our streets and what rights we demand from the tech our tax dollars pay for. This conversation hasn't happened yet, the policy doesn't exist, and thus I believe approval of this drone purchase is irresponsible and exposes our residents to great harm.
>
>Thank you. I am looking forward to working with you on that broader effort to protect our safety and determine what kind of tech we want on our streets. 

> [!abstract]- Email to Council: Nov 18, 2025
*This is the text of an email sent to the Portland City Council on November 18, 2025 following the vote to purchase a drone. The vote failed, but it's likely to reappear on the next agenda.*
>
> Hello Mayor and City Councilors,
>
> I wanted to follow-up from the discussion last night on the drone purchase and offer some additional info and some clarifications based on the discussion that happened after public comment. 
>
> First: thank you Councilor Ali for suggesting a workshop on this material. I would be interested in participating in such a workshop, if it were held on either this purchase or on a more broad discussion related to digital civil liberties. I have followed this issue in the HHS Committee for the past year. It was initially introduced in September 2024. It was brought through committee, to council, and back to committee - from best I can tell. Though I appreciate Councilor Sykes and Bullett's efforts to change the policy and what I imagine amounted to a lot of work behind the scenes, the fact remains that **we have not had a broad public discussion about whether we want this tech in our streets.** The fact also remains that this is an internal operating procedure that's not accountable to the voters or the council. I do not find this level of oversight acceptable.
>
> Let's also talk about the cost, and the piece around ownership of the data as I believe there are some misconceptions here. 
>
> **Cost**
>
> I think a fundamental thing to understand with this kind of tech is how it's different from the ways local government used to buy things. Correct me if this analogy is wrong, but here goes: let's compare this drone with something like a snow plow. Before, local gov would put out an RFP to buy a snow plow. You'd get a few bids, select one, and buy the plow. It's a pretty standard kind of plow, so training can be done by most anyone who knows how to drive a plow. Parts and repair can be bought from multiple places. The mechanics at public works can repair the plow. 
  >
> Now let's compare this with Axon's drone. Axon sells you the drone, even though they don't actually manufacture it. A company named Skydio makes the drone. You're not putting this out to a competitive bid, and you aren't comparing options in the open. Axon sells the tech, Axon sells the software. Let's say, three years down the road, that Axon's software keeps crashing at key moments, preventing the drone from working. An Amazon Web Services outage hits, thanks to all the strain from data centers, and the drone basically can't fly. What if Portland wants to keep the drone, an expensive piece of tech, but switch software? Maybe we want to just host it locally or maybe we decide there's a better option out there. Can we still even use the drone? Will it function without the Axon software? That's a good question to ask, and I would assume that the tech is now functionally dead. Now, what if the hardware breaks: who can fix it? Certainly not public works, so you'll have to ask Axon for that. Who can train you on the drone? Not public works, either. You'll have to ask Axon. Who can fix bugs in the software? You got it: Axon. You're not just baking in the body cam, dash cam, evidence.com, _and_ the drone into this contract, you're also starting with an agreement that locks the city in to the whole suite of services that are all priced in a **non-competitive way aka, with no comparisons, no competitive bids, and no open process**
>
> This is why I find it irresponsible to say "let's revisit it down the road" when you're signing a multi-year contract. This isn't simply a purchase of a drone, it's also a three-year software contract. Would you really, then, revisit your agreement with Axon _after_ you've already bought three years worth of services? This is not a pilot; it's a purchase with a three-year software agreement. 
>
> **As stated in the [police memo](https://file:///Users/emburnett/Downloads/Item%203-Attachment%20E%20\(PD%20UAV\).pdf "police memo"), "The UAS system has an estimated useful life of 5-7 years."** 
>
> From the time the drone was introduced last fall until now, the cost estimate jumped by $5k. Axon is still in the heavy "sales" phase of this product, where they want to entice more departments to sign agreements. What will it cost once they already have thousands of customers and no longer are incentivized to get new customers, but rather to make more money from existing ones? How much is the total contract with Axon, including the dash cam, body cam, evidence.com? When is it next up for discussion?
>
> **Data ownership**
>
> This part alone is worthy of more discussion and research prior to another vote. Though Portland retains [ownership of the data](https://file:///Users/emburnett/Downloads/Item%203-Attachment%20A%20\(FAQs\).pdf "ownership of the data"), digital, cloud-stored data is not so simply defined. The most important piece of context I'd share here is the fact that, due to being a cloud-based product, we need to look to the CLOUD Act, signed by the Trump admin into law in 2018. The Cloud Act is a shadowy piece of legislation that allows foreign governments - and the US federal government - to bypass local data privacy and civil liberties legislation by directly requesting data from tech vendors like Axon. Here are provisions of the CLOUD Act, as [provided by EFF](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/03/responsibility-deflected-cloud-act-passes "provided by EFF"):
>
> - Enable foreign police to collect and wiretap people's communications from U.S. companies, without obtaining a U.S. warrant.
> - Allow foreign nations to demand personal data stored in the United States, without prior review by a judge.
>- Allow the U.S. president to enter "executive agreements" that empower police in foreign nations that have weaker privacy laws than the United States to seize data in the United States while ignoring U.S. privacy laws.
>- Allow foreign police to collect someone's data without notifying them about it.
>- Empower U.S. police to grab any data, regardless if it's a U.S. person's or not, no matter where it is stored. 
>
> The only protection against such a far-reaching legislation is to **not store data in a cloud-based service like Axon — period.** The federal government cannot request or demand data (either at their own behest or through a loophole that allows a partner like the UK to request such information on behalf of federal authorities) if it's not stored in a cloud service like Axon. You really can imagine the kind of loopholes that this opens up, especially as it relates to the ICE/CBP priority of surveilling suspected foreign nationals. It really doesn't matter that only Portland "owns" the data with a vulnerability like this. We have to remember that this is just the start, too, as the bulk of the new ICE budget's funding has yet to be spent. I'd draw your attention to who this will affect most, namely the Black and brown community members in Portland. 
>
> **FAA Regulations** 
>
> I would note that FAA regulations changed in March 2025 to allow for UAV to be operated remotely _and_ to fly over crowds of people. This fact was not shared by the police chief last night, so I wanted to make sure you are also aware of it. [This article provides some helpful background on this new waiver process](https://www.flyingmag.com/coa-loophole-how-law-enforcement-bypasses-federal-drone-licensing/ "This article provides some helpful background on this new waiver process").
>
> I am happy to share this in any additional format that might make sense, and truly appreciate your time on this. Please do reach out if you'd like to discuss further. This stuff is complicated and is affected so directly by federal policy and the ever-emerging tech landscape. I do have quite a bit of experience in local, open-source software development and would like to offer what I know to anyone who would like to learn more.
>
> Thank you for your time.